ADR - Forms states and using AASM for state machine (#134)
alphagov/forms: ADR/ADR025-use-aasm-to-manage-form-state.md

# ADR025: Use AASM to manage form state 

Date: 2024-02-05

## Status

> Accepted

## Context

### Before

Initially, there only three "states" that a form could be in, "Draft", "Live" and a combination of the two "Live with draft". These states were not hardcoded and we inferred by a combination of attribute  

> 1. Draft - All "Form" records are draft

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Draft - All "Form" records start as in draft
```

Reviewer: I think I've made this less clear 🤦

Author: What I was trying to say is that when looking at `Form` record before AASM was introduced, we should consider `Form` as being a draft record which a user can also edit at any point but it wouldn't be made live until a snapshot of it has been copied over to made_live_forms

- allowed us to use guards to ensure that forms could not be left in an invalid state (example live forms that didn't 
  have `made_live_forms` records

A [spike was completed](https://github.com/alphagov/forms-api/pull/414) to investigate how easy it would be to implement a state machine gem such as [AASM](https://github.com/aasm/aasm).

## Decision

AASM is a well known state machine which seemed to fit our needs better than us manually trying to track the state with a 
plain enum database column. It would first used to replicate our existing states and can then be used in the future to
introduce new states like `archived` forms.

The follow work was done in this order to add proper state management:

- [add state column to form model and bare bones state machine](https://github.com/alphagov/forms-api/pull/422)
- [tidy up migrations into a single migration file](https://github.com/alphagov/forms-api/pull/428)
- [Integrate FormStateMachine into Form model and start tracking state through events](https://github.com/alphagov/forms-api/pull/425)
- [Change has_draft_version & has_live_version to use form state column](https://github.com/alphagov/forms-api/pull/429)

> While implementing the above, we discovered we needed to temporaryly introduce a new state to transistion from `live` to `draft`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While implementing the above, we discovered we needed to temporarily introduce a new state to transition from `live` to `draft`
```
